---
title: "NBA In-Season Tournament"
description: "By Isabella Gonzales, Siya Pun, Niharika Suravarjjala, Matthew Chan", and Eric Kye"
date: 2023-12-06
---

### **Introduction**: 

The NBA holds a prominent position in the sports world, celebrated for
its star athletes and exhilarating gameplay that captivates a wide
audience. Over the past two decades, the league has witnessed remarkable
growth, attracting exceptional talent from diverse corners of the globe.

Unlike some sports leagues that reward consistent performance throughout
the season, the NBA places paramount importance on securing a single
championship trophy in the playoffs. However, there's been a noticeable
shift in recent years—while playoff viewership remains robust, interest
in the regular season seems to dwindle until the playoffs arrive in
April.

In response, the NBA devised a unique initiative: the In-Season
Tournament, reminiscent of mid-season tournaments seen in European
football. This tournament aims to rejuvenate excitement during the
non-playoff phase of NBA basketball and has garnered substantial
attention, eliciting mixed reactions from both fans and critics. Our aim
is to conduct an in-depth exploration of this tournament, delving into
player performances, team standings, injury insights, marketing
strategies, and viewership trends.

### **Viewership (Siya)**:

Increased by approximately 55%

The Lakers-Suns game attracted 1.93 million viewers, which was a 73%
increase from the Bucks-Timberwolves game in the last year’s equivalent
doubleheader (1.12 million)​​.

The Nets-Celtics game had 1.41 million viewers, a slight 4% decline from
the Bulls-Celtics game in the previous year’s equivalent doubleheader
(1.47 million)​​.

Inaugural Tournament Interest: The initial interest in the new
competition was solid, with the tournament's launch seeing 1.7 million
viewers​​.

These figures indicate a significant interest in the NBA's new in-season
tournament, with overall viewership showing a substantial increase
compared to similar time slots in the previous season. This suggests
that the tournament has been successful in attracting viewers and
enhancing fan engagement.

The NBA has to be heartened by the In-Season Tournament’s early numbers
on TV. For the two Fridays that it has carried tournament games, ESPN
viewership is up 55% vs. the comparable windows last season. And it’s
not just ESPN. Viewership of tournament games on NBA League Pass is up
42% vs. the 2023 regular-season average to date.

“ESPN had the honors of broadcasting the very first In-Season Tournament
game between the Knicks and Bucks and averaged 1.644 million viewers.
The Mavericks/Nuggets game in the 10:30 p.m. window averaged 1.76
million.

Compared to average NBA Friday night coverage on ESPN, viewership was up
35% in terms of the In-Season Tournament.

The In-Season Tournament runs through December 9, when the final two
teams will play for the championship in Las Vegas.”

### **Marketing (Matthew):**

In order for the NBA IN Season Tournament to become successful, it must
be marketed. The tournament must draw fan engagement, but more
importantly, help the fans understand how it works so they stay
interested.

Fan favorite NBA players such as Richard Jefferson have helped break
down how the IN Season Tournament works by breaking down each component
of the tournament. On top of that, companies such as Splash have
partnered with its subsidiary RunYourPool to create contests on social
media and connected TV to boost engagement with fans by giving them a
chance to win tickets to the IN Season Tournament games.

The NBA has created brand new flashy courts to draw the attention of
viewers. Not only has the NBA created brand new courts, but they have
also created a special new advertisement called, “The Heist”. It
featured seven fan-favorite NBA All-Stars including Anthony Davis,
DeRozan, Trae Young, Julius Randle, Kawhi Leonard, Draymond Green, and
Darius Garland plotting to steal the NBA IN Season trophy. To top it
off, they also had Emmy award-winning actor, Michael Imperioli make an
appearance. This commercial sparked a lot of excitement and buzz within
the NBA world and its fans.

Although there was much joy with the tournament, it also brought a lot
of controversy. Companies such as ESPN created a lot of buzz on their
show First Take with popular faces in the Sports World such as Stephen A
Smith. They brought in a variety of NBA players to share their thoughts
about the tournament and all of them stated how ecstatic they were for
it. Although the NBA players were thrilled, a lot of sports commentators
such as Michael Wilbon, blasted the NBA’s in-season tournament as a
“marketing ploy”.

The tournament sparked a lot of debate, but along with it, brought a lot
of publicity for the tournament as well. Whether agreeing or debating,
people were constantly discussing their thoughts about the tournament
which helped the NBA market it by sparking interest in people to see the
turnout.

To further marketing, sports betting companies promoted the tournament
by creating special betting deals to help get more people involved and
interested in the tournament whether they were watching it to win the
bet or for their favorite players. DraftKings Sportsbook had a betting
deal where if you bet \$5, win \$150 in bonus bets and daily No Sweat
SGPs guaranteed. FanDuel Sportsbook had another deal where bettors
received \$150 in bonus bets with a successful \$5 moneyline bet and
daily profit boosts. BetMGM Sportsbook’s deal was up to \$1,500 back in
bonus bets if your first bet loses and Bet365 Sportsbook had bet \$5,
win \$150 instantly or \$1,000 in first-bet insurance. The bets helped
draw in people who may or may not like the NBA to pay more attention to
the NBA In-Season Tournament.

The NBA has done an abundance of marketing from explaining how the
tournament works so there is little to no confusion, creating
advertisements using fan-favorite players, making in-tournament specific
products, generating a lot of positive or negative buzz, and finding
ways to interest those who may not be huge fans of the NBA, but instead
betting. According to Adam Silver, “The NBA In-Season Tournament is
estimated to make about 1 Billion in revenue”.

![](media/image13.png){width="6.5in" height="4.125in"}

Revenue for NBA Teams - Credit to Runrepeat.com

### **Injuries (Niha)**:

The concept of an in-season NBA tournament, an idea borrowed from
European football leagues, presents an exciting twist to the regular NBA
season, promising to add an extra layer of competitiveness and
entertainment. However, it also raises concerns about player health and
the potential increase in injuries. Analyzing the current injury
statistics of NBA teams can provide insights into how an additional
tournament might impact players' well-being.

As of the provided data, notable injuries are spread across various
teams. The Atlanta Hawks are dealing with injuries to Mouhamed Gueye and
Kobe Bufkin, with Gueye out due to a stress fracture in his back and
Bufkin expected to miss several weeks due to a thumb fracture. The
Boston Celtics have Derrick White and Al Horford out for personal
reasons and rest, respectively. The Brooklyn Nets are coping with the
absence of players like Dennis Smith Jr. and Ben Simmons due to back and
hip issues, respectively.

For the Chicago Bulls, Lonzo Ball's ongoing recovery from a knee surgery
is a significant concern, especially with him being ruled out for the
entire season. The Cleveland Cavaliers have multiple players out,
including Isaac Okoro and Ty Jerome, both sidelined for upcoming games.
The Dallas Mavericks are without Seth Curry and Maxi Kleber due to hip
soreness and a toe injury, respectively.

These injuries illustrate the physical toll the regular NBA season can
already exert on players. The introduction of an in-season tournament
could potentially exacerbate this issue. Players might face increased
fatigue and a higher risk of injuries due to the added games and the
intensity that comes with a tournament format. This format, while
potentially thrilling for fans and beneficial for the league in terms of
viewership and revenue, could lead to more significant wear and tear on
athletes.

Moreover, teams like the Los Angeles Lakers, with LeBron James, Anthony
Davis, and several others listed as day-to-day or out, demonstrate the
vulnerability even top teams have to injuries. The Memphis Grizzlies,
with six players injured, including key figures like Steven Adams and
Brandon Clarke, highlight how injuries can impact team performance and
depth.

In terms of statistics, the average number of injured players per team,
based on the provided data, offers a glimpse into the current state of
team health across the league. Teams like the Los Angeles Lakers and
Memphis Grizzlies, with five and six injured players respectively, are
above the league average. In contrast, teams like the Portland Trail
Blazers and the San Antonio Spurs, each with one injured player, are
well below this average. This variance underscores how injuries can
unevenly impact teams, potentially affecting competitive balance in an
in-season tournament.

The potential introduction of an in-season NBA tournament must be
carefully weighed against these injury statistics. While the tournament
could bring excitement and a new competitive element to the league, the
health and well-being of players should be a paramount consideration.
The league might need to explore strategies to mitigate injury risks,
such as expanded rosters, more rest days, or even reducing the number of
regular-season games to accommodate the tournament.

In conclusion, while the idea of an in-season NBA tournament is
intriguing and could bring a fresh dynamic to the league, it also poses
significant concerns regarding player health. The current injury
statistics highlight the existing challenges teams face in managing
players' health throughout the season. Any plans for such a tournament
should be approached with a comprehensive strategy to ensure that the
excitement and competitive spirit of the game do not come at the expense
of player well-being.

![](media/image10.png){width="6.5in" height="4.013888888888889in"}

### **Player Statistics (Eric)**: 

![](media/image1.png){width="6.5in" height="4.013888888888889in"}

![](media/image5.png){width="6.5in" height="4.013888888888889in"}

![](media/image3.png){width="6.5in"
height="4.013888888888889in"}![](media/image12.png){width="6.5in"
height="0.9305555555555556in"}

\*\* Correlation between regular season ppg and In season tournament
ppg. There seems to be a relatively strong correlation between the two
different datasets for ppg.

![](media/image6.png){width="5.276042213473316in"
height="3.2558136482939632in"}

![](media/image2.png){width="6.5in" height="4.013888888888889in"}

![](media/image8.png){width="6.5in" height="4.013888888888889in"}

![](media/image4.png){width="6.5in"
height="4.013888888888889in"}![](media/image11.png){width="6.5in"
height="1.4861111111111112in"}

#### **Game Statistics (Isabella):**

One of the primary reasons the in-season tournament has been a
game-changer is the heightened intensity it brings to the regular NBA
calendar. While regular season games are undoubtedly crucial for playoff
seeding and overall standings, the tournament adds an extra layer of
urgency and competitiveness into the mix. Teams are not just playing for
a win; they are vying for a tournament win and cash prize, and this
added incentive translates into a noticeable increase in player effort.\
One of the most noticeable impacts of the in-season tournament is the
uptick in game pace. Teams exhibit a more aggressive style of play. The
compressed format and the incentive of tournament success drive players
to push the tempo, resulting in a faster and more entertaining brand of
basketball. The average pace statistic during regular season games so
far is 100.25 and the same statistic during tournament games is 102.
Though it is small this increase can be felt by fans and caters to their
desire for excitement, leading to an increase in viewership as mentioned
in the previous sections.

![](media/image16.png){width="3.244792213473316in"
height="1.8927952755905513in"}![](media/image14.png){width="3.151042213473316in"
height="1.8231780402449693in"}

While the defensive end increases intensity, offensive players also find
new avenues to improve. The condensed schedule and high stakes push
players to unlock their offensive potential, resulting in an increase in
offensive rating. The regular season average offensive rating of players
was 110.35 and the tournament average was 112.85, a noticeable increase.
The high of 155 is also significantly higher than the regular season
high of 125.3. A similar trend can be seen with the defensive rating
data with a 2.74 point average defensive rating increase in the
tournament.

![](media/image9.png){width="3.1458333333333335in"
height="1.8318493000874891in"}![](media/image17.png){width="3.2552088801399823in"
height="1.8959853455818023in"}

![](media/image15.png){width="3.3281255468066493in"
height="1.9371128608923884in"}![](media/image7.png){width="3.008928258967629in"
height="1.7552088801399826in"}

The games on average has been closer in score during the tournament and
though this might be anxiety inducing for some fans, for most this makes
for a more exciting game thus increasing viewership. Overall the
tournament improves the level of game play, raising the bar for players
to continue to excel, and improves the viewer experience.

#### **Conclusion:**

The NBA in-season tournament has proven to be a game-changer, injecting
a new level of excitement and competition into the regular season. The
increased game pace, defensive intensity, and offensive brilliance
create a perfect storm of entertainment for fans. As teams vie for the
tournament title, players push their limits, resulting in an elevated
overall quality of gameplay that transcends the typical regular-season
matchups. The increase in viewership and media buzz will help the
organization immensely and will be able to improve the organization's
reach. The in-season tournament has created an annual spectacle that
captivates basketball enthusiasts worldwide.

Edited by Abhi Sharma
